#summary Download & Installation

= Windows: Download & Installation for Newbies =

The LISPBUILDER-SDL package relies on the external [http://www.libsdl.org/ libSDL] dynamic linked library. [http://www.libsdl.org/ libSDL] is downloaded and installed automatically using the procedure describe below.

 # Download & install [http://www.lispworks.com/downloads/index.html Lispworks Personal Edition].
 # Download & install [http://www.weitz.de/starter-pack/ Edi Weitz's Lisp Starter Pack].
 # Download & save [http://www.balooga.com/lispbuilder/config.lisp config.lisp] to the same location as the Lisp Starter Pack. _Note:_ `LispStarterPack.exe` and `config.lisp` must be in the same directory.
 # Run `LispStarterPack.exe` and select the `LISPBUILDER-*` packages. The packages will be downloaded and installed (in `Win XP`) to  `"My Documents\Lisp Libraries"`.

= Windows: Using LISPBUILDER-SDL =

The following instructions apply to the [http://www.weitz.de/starter-pack/#use Edi Weitz's Lisp Starter Pack] above.

 # Start `Lispworks`.
 # Use the `File menu` to `Load...` (and _not_ `Open...`) the file `start.lisp` that was installed in a directory called `"Lisp Libraries"` within the `"My Documents"` folder. Lispworks will now compile the packages.
 # Execute the following in the Lispworks `"Listener"` (the REPL) window when compilation is `DONE`.
  ** `(ASDF:OPERATE 'ASDF:LOAD-OP :LISPBUILDER-SDL-EXAMPLES)`
 # Run one of the examples to verify that the installation was successful;
  ** `(SDL-EXAMPLES:PARTICLES)`

ASDF will take care of loading the `CFFI` and `:LISPBUILDER-SDL` dependencies. The `SDL.dll` library will also be loaded into the Lisp image at this time.

= Download & Installation for OS X, Linux, BSD and Windows Alternate = 

The `LISPBUILDER-SDL` packages rely on several external dynamic linked libraries that are not included as part of the `LISPBUILDER-SDL` distribution. These libraries must be installed prior to loading any of the `LISPBUILDER-SDL` packages. Additional information on the dependencies for a package as well as the download & installation procedures are are [DownloadInstallation described here].