#summary LISPBUILDER-SDL Windows CLISP installation
#sidebar TableOfContents

= Overview =

This section describes the installation and configuration of CLISP and LISPBUILDER-SDL for Windows.

A summary of the process is as follows;

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

= Install  CLISP =

Download [http://clisp.cons.org/ CLISP] for Windows;

 * [http://sourceforge.net/project/platformdownload.php?group_id=1355 Latest version of CLISP for various OSes (including Windows)]

Install CLISP to the default directory; from now on this directory will be denoted as:

{{{
[CLISP]
}}}

Note: Here, `[CLISP]` means to insert the installation directory (e.g. "C:\Program Files\clisp-X.Y\"), not the literal text "`[CLISP]`".

Wherever you put CLISP, it is important to set the environment variable PATH. Fortunately, the installer automatically does this, so just make sure to check the option in the installer.

Also note that in order for these changes to take effect, you may need to restart your computer.

= Install ASDF =

[http://common-lisp.net/project/asdf/ ASDF] is a system which assists with compiling and loading libraries. Since it does not come with CLISP by default, download it from

 * http://cclan.cvs.sourceforge.net/*checkout*/cclan/asdf/asdf.lisp

And place the file in

{{{
[CLISP]\site\asdf.lisp
}}}

= Install CFFI and Dependencies =

Download the latest version of [http://common-lisp.net/project/cffi/ CFFI];

 * [http://common-lisp.net/project/cffi/tarballs/?M=D CFFI]

The latest version of CFFI has three dependencies that must also be downloaded;

 * [http://www.cliki.net/Alexandria ALEXANDRIA]
 * [http://www.cliki.net/Babel BABEL]
 * [http://www.cliki.net/trivial-features TRIVIAL-FEATURES]

Extract these packages to the following directories;

{{{
[CLISP]\site\cffi\
[CLISP]\site\alexandria\
[CLISP]\site\babel\
[CLISP]\site\trivial-features\
}}}

= Install LISPBUILDER-SDL and Binaries =

Download `LISPBUILDER-SDL` from [http://code.google.com/p/lispbuilder/source/checkout source] (requires SVN), or [http://code.google.com/p/lispbuilder/downloads/list downloads] above. Install to;

{{{
[CLISP]\site\lispbuilder-sdl\
}}}

Download the required SDL binaries;

 * _win32-lispbuilder-sdl-binaries.tgz_ from [http://code.google.com/p/lispbuilder/downloads/list downloads] above, or
 * SDL from the [http://www.libsdl.org official site] or another package

Install to the following directory;

{{{
[CLISP]\site\lispbuilder-sdl\
}}}

= Create an CLISP User Initialization File =

Create a new `.clisprc.lisp` file in your home directory; 

{{{
[HOME]\.clisprc.lisp
}}}

If you are unaware which directory CLISP considers your home directory, start CLISP and execute;

{{{
> clisp
...
Welcome to GNU CLISP X.Y (YYYY-MM-DD) <http://clisp.cons.org/>
...
[1]> (user-homedir-pathname)
#P"C:\\Documents and Settings\\Your Name\\"
}}}

Add the following to the `.clisprc.lisp` file above;

{{{
(load (compile-file "[CLISP]\\site\\asdf.lisp"))

;; put all subdirectories of [CLISP]\site\ into asdf:*central-registry*
(pushnew "[CLISP]\\site\\*\\" asdf:*central-registry* :test 'equal)
 
;; load lispbuilder-sdl
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :lispbuilder-sdl)
(asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :lispbuilder-sdl-binaries)
}}}

Note that you'll have to double up the backslashes in `[CLISP]` to avoid confusing CLISP.

= Try the Examples =

To make sure your configuration works, start CLISP and try one of the examples;

{{{
> clisp
...
Welcome to GNU CLISP X.Y (YYYY-MM-DD) <http://clisp.cons.org/>
...

* (asdf:operate 'asdf:load-op :lispbuilder-sdl-examples)
...

* (sdl-examples:mandelbrot)
}}}

= Emacs and SLIME =

If you don't already have an editor you use for Lisp code, [http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/ Emacs] and [http://common-lisp.net/project/slime/ SLIME] are a good combination.